Counting is an Endeavor ¶ Counting has been a fascination ever since the human mind got beyond the notion "self" and "other." Once plurality became a thing worth figuring out, the species made some pretty incredible advances. § Considering Time ¶ Sexagesimal is a numeral system with sixty as its base, with origins starting 5000 years ago with ancient Sumerians, then to Babylonians. We even use it TODAY to measure things such as time and angles ¶ Sixty, as a number, is an interesting specimen. It can be composed of many other numbers—namely the first six integers. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 are all factors. 10, 12, 15, 20, 30 and of course 60 are also factors. It's not just convenience that an hour can be divided by 30, 20, 10 minutes, or a 24 hour day can be broken in to halves, thirds, and quarters. Further, our yearly unit of 365 is 99% accurate to a the 360 degrees in a circle—and you can see that 360 divides 60 and comes with all of those interesting properties of time. ¶ It does not stop there. Look down at your left hand and count the number of segments you have between your knuckles (you will count 12). Now try to use your thumb to touch every segment (you probably can). You have 5 remaining digits on your right hand, and with the pointer, and the index of 5, you have an easy way to count to 60, because 5 digits + the 12 knuckle segments is 60. When it comes to measuring time and basic counting, this 5000 year old system is pretty damn clever. § What it means "to count" ¶ Counting in any system is composed of a numeral system with a finite number of symbols. We are familiar with DECIMAL, or base-10, which means we have a set of 10 symbols to work with: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9. When we run out of available symbols, we start reusing them—so when we get to 9, we are forced to reuse the 0 again, and carry the one over to indicate 1 full set plus 0 singles. We repeat as we get past 100, 1000, etc. We are so familiar with this that we forget how absolutely arbitrary it is. It  was likely chosen because we have 10 fingers, and it made our nascent ideas of arithmetic easier to work out. ¶ It is arbitrary though, and that is important to remember—counting is still ruled by the simple idea of HOW MANY SYMBOLS DO YOU HAVE AVAILABLE. From that perspective, there is one fundamental root of counting that can said to be the mandatory position, and that is you need at least 2 symbols to count, which was understood by ancient peoples, though hard to do in practice—that is until the modern computer was put into action. ¶ Picture a light switch—it can be off or on—and off/on can easily be thought of as 0 and 1. Fast forward a great deal and add several thousands of light switches that can switch at billions of times a second and you have the profundity of a modern computer. § Perspective on Numbers ¶ All this counting belies the fact that numbers are actually much more interesting than what can be counted. In fact, counting is VERY EASY, and thus, anything that has some aspect of being "countable" is actually not all that difficult to understand. Many who study science, math and art will be the first to point out that many numbers are impossible to understand so simply. In mathematics these are called IRRATIONAL NUMBERS—such as pi, the golden ratio and the square root of two. These numbers expose themselves everywhere—in proportions, growth, music, typography, fashion, astronomy—you name it. As a designer, working with these numbers is quite valuable. § Citations and footnotes: ¶ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sexagesimal ¶ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_number ¶ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decimal ¶ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irrational_number
